Rough draft of Modules wave containers Blog post(s) (#2654)
nf-core/website: sites/main-site/src/content/blog/2024/seqera-containers-part-1.mdx

-   Docker + Singularity images will be built by Wave and stored in Seqera Containers for subsequent use.
-   The nf-core website will show image source files and build logs for each module.
-   Conda lock-files will be generated by Wave for improved reproducibility for Conda users and CI tests.
-   Modules will have conda versions automatically bumped, using [Renovate](https://renovatebot.com/).
-   There should be almost no effect on how end-users run nf-core pipelines.

:::

## Background

Software containers are a fundamental part of modern bioinformatics workflows. Nextflow supports multiple container platforms, but the two most commonly used are Docker and Singularity. The concept is simple: all of the software requirements for a specific Nextflow process are wrapped up into a container image and referenced within the pipeline code. The process tasks run in isolation of the host environment and the end user doesn't need to worry about installing software dependencies for the pipeline. Best of all, the software builds are locked in time making results highly reproducible over many years.

> To ensure maximum compatibility and reproducibility across compute environments, nf-core modules are typically set up with a conda `environment.yml`, listing software package dependencies from [Bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io/) for conda users. The nf-core module developer then finds the matching [BioContainer](https://biocontainers.pro/) image URLs, which are then hardcoded into the module's `main.nf` script. The BioContainers project automatically builds Docker and Singularity images whenever a new tool is released on Bioconda, hosting the images publicly on [quay.io](quay.io) and the Galaxy FTP servers, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure maximum compatibility and reproducibility across compute environments, nf-core modules are typically set up with a conda `environment.yml`, listing software package dependencies from [Bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io/) for conda users.
The BioContainers project automatically builds Docker and Singularity images whenever a new tool is released on Bioconda, hosting the images publicly on [quay.io](quay.io) and the Galaxy FTP servers, respectively.
The nf-core module developer finds the matching [BioContainer](https://biocontainers.pro/) image URLs, which they hardcode into the module's `main.nf` script.
```

            <td>❌</td>
            <td>✅</td>
            <td>✅</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Long storage duration</td>
            <td>✅ *</td>
            <td>❌ 72 hours cache</td>
            <td>✅ *</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Pull delay for conda packages</td>
            <td>✅ instant</td>
            <td>❌ ~2-3 minutes for build on first request</td>
            <td>✅ instant</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Stable image URIs</td>
            <td>✅</td>
            <td>❌ Single-run</td>
            <td>✅</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Software required for end user</td>
            <td>Docker / Singularity</td>
            <td>Wave CLI / Nextflow, Docker / Singularity</td>
            <td>Docker / Singularity</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Offline support with downloaded images</td>
            <td>✅</td>
            <td>❌</td>
            <td>✅</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Guaranteed identical conda builds in future image pulls</td>
            <td>✅</td>
            <td>❌</td>
            <td>✅</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

> > \* Forever is a long time, and we're not fortune tellers. To help the community trust the program, Seqera is committing to keeping images for a minimum of 5 years after they're built. BioContainers has no public policy, images will presumably remain until quay.io / Galaxy remove support.

Reviewer 2: does this commitment of keep for min 5yrs start from the creation of a container ?

Reviewer: Yup, see FAQ on https://seqera.io/containers/ :

![CleanShot 2024-09-12 at 00 04 14@2x](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a4d4c91b-fa19-4f1d-a9a1-70f6665f298c)

Would "creation" be clearer that "built"?

```suggestion
> \* Forever is a long time, and we're not fortune tellers. To help the community trust the program, Seqera is committing to keeping images for a minimum of 5 years from the time of their creation. BioContainers has no public policy, images will presumably remain until quay.io / Galaxy remove support.
```

Seqera serves nf-core as its primary community: as such it should be in a position to respond immediately to any problems or needs. All Seqera Container images (Docker and Singularity) are hosted on custom infrastructure built by Seqera with hosting provided by AWS, so the whole stack is within reach.

## Potential concerns

<Image class="d-block ms-3 mb-3 float-end rounded w-25 shadow" src={chillies} alt="Photo by Anne Nygård on Unsplash." />

### Will these be reproducible?

Because the images are hosted on long-term infrastructure and their URLs are hardcoded into pipeline configuration, they should be highly reproducible. Even if new builds of the same software are created in the future using Wave (for example due to an update in the base infrastructure used by Wave) then the old images are still pinned by the pipeline and will continue to be used, much like the BioContainer URIs used currently.

> Because the container URIs are stored in the module-level `meta.yml` file, any pipelines using the same shared nf-core/module will also be using the exact same container images.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because the container URIs will be stored in the module-level `meta.yml` file, any pipelines using the same shared nf-core/module will also be using the exact same container images.
```

> We will further improve reproducibility at the conda level by adopting the use of conda lock-files. These pin the exact dependency stack used by the build, not just the top level primary tool being requested. This effectively removes the need for conda to solve the build and also ships md5 hashes for every package. This will greatly improve the reproducibility of the software environments for conda users, as well as improving reliability of Conda CI tests.

Reviewer: We had that originally but I removed it. They're pretty long and ugly and we will likely have dedicated blog posts going out about specifically this in the coming months.

However I could add a short head back here if you think it'd help. It'd break up the text a little if nothing else.. 👍🏻

> We will further improve reproducibility at the conda level by adopting the use of conda lock-files. These pin the exact dependency stack used by the build, not just the top level primary tool being requested. This effectively removes the need for conda to solve the build and also ships md5 hashes for every package. This will greatly improve the reproducibility of the software environments for conda users, as well as improving reliability of Conda CI tests.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
We will further improve reproducibility at the conda level by adopting the use of conda lock-files. These pin the exact dependency stack used by the build, not just the top level primary tool being requested. This effectively removes the need for conda to solve the build and also ships md5 hashes for every package. This will greatly improve the reproducibility of the software environments for conda users, as well as improving reliability of Conda CI tests.

```yaml
# This file may be used to create an environment using:
# $ conda create --name <env> --file <this file>
# platform: linux-64
@EXPLICIT
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/_libgcc_mutex-0.1-conda_forge.tar.bz2#d7c89558ba9fa0495403155b64376d81
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/libgomp-14.1.0-h77fa898_1.conda#23c255b008c4f2ae008f81edcabaca89
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/_openmp_mutex-4.5-2_gnu.tar.bz2#73aaf86a425cc6e73fcf236a5a46396d
https://conda.anaconda.org/conda-forge/linux-64/libgcc-14.1.0-h77fa898_1.conda#002ef4463dd1e2b44a94a4ace468f5d2
# .. truncated ..
```
````

import butwhy from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-1/simone-secci-49uySSA678U-unsplash.jpg';
import mulled from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-1/hannah-pemberton-bXi4eg4jyuU-unsplash.jpg';
import chillies from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-1/anne-nygard-3tPkwnNRRkI-unsplash.jpg';
import wave_logs from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-1/logs_screenshot.png';
import leaves from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-1/providence-doucet-mE5MBZX5sko-unsplash.jpg';

import { Image } from 'astro:assets';

## Introduction

Software containers are a fundamental part of modern bioinformatics workflows. Nextflow supports multiple container platforms, but the two most commonly used are Docker and Singularity. All of the software requirements for a specific Nextflow process are wrapped up into a container image and referenced within the pipeline code. The process tasks run in isolation of the host environment and the end user doesn't need to worry about installing software dependencies for the pipeline. Best of all, the software builds are locked in time making results highly reproducible over many years.

> To ensure maximum compatibility across different environments, nf-core modules are typically set up with a conda `environment.yml`, listing software package dependencies from [Bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io/) for conda users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To ensure maximum compatibility across different environments, nf-core modules are typically set up with a conda `environment.yml`, listing software package dependencies from [Bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io/).
```

The [BioContainers project](https://biocontainers.pro/) conveniently builds Docker and Singularity images for all tools on Bioconda automatically, hosting the images publicly on [quay.io](quay.io) and the Galaxy FTP servers, respectively.
This means that the nf-core module developer can find the matching [BioContainer](https://biocontainers.pro/) images for their Bioconda package, and then add the image URLs into the module's `main.nf` script.

> The Bioconda and BioContainer projects have been invaluable to the success of nf-core. We're hugely grateful to all contributors for the work that they put in, as well to the Galaxy project for hosting.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Bioconda and BioContainer projects have been invaluable to nf-core's success. 
We're hugely grateful to all contributors for their work and to the Galaxy project for hosting.
```

[Seqera blog post](https://seqera.io/blog/introducing-seqera-pipelines-containers/),
[AWS blog post + podcast](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/hpc/announcing-seqera-containers-for-the-bioinformatics-community/),
[Nextflow Channels podcast](https://nextflow.io/podcast/2024/ep38_seqera_pipelines_containers.html)).

Seqera Containers allows anyone to request a container image based on Conda or PyPI packages. The image is built on demand and then saved so that subsequent requests return the exact same container image files.

The Seqera Containers service has a lot in common with BioContainers. Both generate Docker and Singularity images from Bioconda. The main difference is _when_ those builds happen.

Seqera Containers is built on top of [Wave](https://seqera.io/wave/) - an open-source tool by Seqera for **on-demand** generation of containers. When a new tool or version is requested, Wave builds a container using Conda and returns it. In contrast, BioContainers runs a build when a new package is created on Bioconda. Building on-demand gives greater flexibility and scalability, especially for multi-tool containers.

> We're not suggesting that nf-core pipeline users should interact with Wave directly. We simply want to replace the mechanism for supplying pre-existing container images in pipelines.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
nf-core pipeline users won't need to interact with Wave directly. We simply plan to replace the mechanism for supplying the default container images in specified in pipelines.
```

            <td>❌ ~2-3 minutes for build on first request</td>
            <td>✅ instant</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Stable image URIs</td>
            <td>✅</td>
            <td>❌ Single-run</td>
            <td>✅</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Software required for end user</td>
            <td>Docker / Singularity</td>
            <td>Wave CLI / Nextflow, Docker / Singularity</td>
            <td>Docker / Singularity</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Offline support with downloaded images</td>
            <td>✅</td>
            <td>❌</td>
            <td>✅</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>Guaranteed identical conda builds in future image pulls</td>
            <td>✅</td>
            <td>❌</td>
            <td>✅</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

<small>
    \* Forever is a long time. Seqera is committing to keeping images for a minimum of 5 years from the time of their
    creation. BioContainers has no public policy.
</small>

:::

### Mulled (multi-package) images

<Image
    class="d-block ms-3 mb-3 float-end rounded w-25 shadow"
    src={mulled}
    alt="Photo by Hannah Pemberton on Unsplash."
/>

> BioContainers is primarily set up to have a 1:1 relationship with Bioconda. This is great for bioinformatics tools: When a package is published, it gets an image. This works well until you need to use more than one tool in a single process, and particularly when the tools are from elsewhere in the conda ecosystem. For example, many bioinformatics tools leverage [samtools](https://www.htslib.org/) to convert file formats or sort reads on the fly. Others may pipe output to compression tools like [pigz](https://zlib.net/pigz/). To resolve this, BioContainers has the concept of “mulled” images (as in [mulled wine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mulled_wine)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
BioContainers is primarily set up to have a 1:1 relationship with Bioconda. This is great for bioinformatics tools as an image is created every time a package is published. This works well until you need to use more than one tool in a single process, particularly when the tools are from elsewhere in the conda ecosystem. For example, many bioinformatics tools leverage [samtools](https://www.htslib.org/) to convert file formats or sort reads on the fly. Others may pipe output to compression tools like [pigz](https://zlib.net/pigz/). To resolve this, BioContainers has the concept of “mulled” images (as in [mulled wine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mulled_wine)).
```

> Unfortunately, generating mulled containers is not trivial. Luke Pembleton, Nextflow Ambassador, has a great blog post summarising the dark art of [Finding the right mulled biocontainer](https://lpembleton.rbind.io/posts/mulled-biocontainers/). Galaxy also has [documentation on the topic](https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/master/admin/container_resolvers.html). In short, to request an image you edit a [CSV file of hashes](https://github.com/BioContainers/multi-package-containers/blob/master/combinations/hash.tsv) in a GitHub repo, scroll all the way to the bottom, and add a line with your requested conda packages. Once edited, the images are built on CI. It used to be that you had to hunt through the GitHub action log to find the URI for your new container. However, [Moriz E. Beber](https://github.com/Midnighter) from the nf-core community has created a webpage to [generate the name of the mulled container](https://midnighter.github.io/mulled) which gently guides you through the process of finding the name of your container and how to update a container if you want to bump the software versions. Once the image is built and you know its address, the final step is to go to nf-core/modules and create a pull-request with the updated containers and bump the versions in the conda `environment.yml`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, generating mulled containers is not trivial. Luke Pembleton, Nextflow Ambassador, has a great blog post summarising the dark art of [Finding the right mulled biocontainer](https://lpembleton.rbind.io/posts/mulled-biocontainers/). Galaxy also has [documentation on the topic](https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/master/admin/container_resolvers.html). In short, to request an image, you need to scroll the way to the bottom of a large [CSV file full of hashes](https://github.com/BioContainers/multi-package-containers/blob/master/combinations/hash.tsv) and add a line with your requested conda packages. Once edited, the images are built on CI. It used to be that you had to hunt through the GitHub action log to find the URI for your new container. However, [Moriz E. Beber](https://github.com/Midnighter) from the nf-core community has created a webpage to [generate the name of the mulled container](https://midnighter.github.io/mulled) which gently guides you through the process of finding the name of your container and how to update a container if you want to bump the software versions. Once the image is built and you know its address, the final step is to go to nf-core/modules, create a pull-request with the updated containers, and bump the versions in the conda `environment.yml`.
```

> This system works and, despite its complexity, is now a familiar process to many nf-core developers. However it does present some problems. It's a highly manual process to update software versions and update the container declarations – just fetching the software for a module often ends up taking longer than writing the entire module. There are also significant delays in waiting for the images to become available. All in all, it can be a frustrating experience and we see this in the volume of Slack messages asking for help. It seems likely that this puts some people off from contributing to nf-core.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This system works and, despite its complexity, is now a familiar process to many nf-core developers. However, it does present some problems. It's a highly manual process to update software versions and the container declarations – just fetching the software for a module often ends up taking longer than writing the entire module. There are also significant delays in waiting for the images to become available. All in all, it can be a frustrating experience and we see this in the volume of Slack messages asking for help. It seems likely that this puts some people off from contributing to nf-core.
```

> Migrating nf-core to use Seqera Containers will make provisioning multi-package containers trivial. The module developer will only need to edit the module `environment.yml` file and everything else will be fully automated and available almost immediately. Packages can be used minutes after their release on Bioconda and we will even have automation in place to bump the Conda + Seqera Containers packages when a tool is updated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Migrating nf-core to use Seqera Containers will make provisioning multi-package containers trivial. The module developer will only need to edit the module `environment.yml` file and everything else will be fully automated and made available almost immediately. Packages can be used minutes after their release on Bioconda and we will have automation in place to bump the Conda + Seqera Containers packages when a tool is updated.
```

By migrating to Seqera Containers we will have similar automation when linting modules, but it will use the Seqera Wave API instead. This has been built to scale to very high volumes and has an extensive and robust back-end with a high degree of monitoring. Note that the Wave API will _not_ be used when people run nf-core pipelines, this is only developers running linting and GitHub Actions automation during development.

### Reliability of hosting

BioContainer Docker images are hosted publicly on [quay.io](http://quay.io). This service is provided free of charge, however in recent years we have had some reliability issues. This becomes more noticeable as the community grows and the number of users trying to pull images increases. Because quay.io is a huge service for whom we are only a tiny player, we have no recourse when this happens and have to just wait until it becomes available again.

> Seqera serves nf-core as its primary community: as such it should be in a position to respond immediately to any problems or needs. All Seqera Container images (Docker and Singularity) are hosted on custom infrastructure built by Seqera with hosting provided by AWS, so the whole stack is within reach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Seqera serves nf-core as its primary community: they will respond immediately to any problems or needs. All Seqera Container images (Docker and Singularity) are hosted on custom infrastructure built by Seqera with hosting provided by AWS, so the whole stack is within reach.
```

## Potential concerns

<Image class="d-block ms-3 mb-3 float-end rounded w-25 shadow" src={chillies} alt="Photo by Anne Nygård on Unsplash." />

### Will these be reproducible?

> Because the images are hosted on long-term infrastructure and their URLs are hardcoded into pipeline configuration, they should be highly reproducible. Even if new builds of the same software are created in the future using Wave (for example due to an update in the base infrastructure used by Wave) then the old images are still pinned by the pipeline and will continue to be used, much like the BioContainer URIs used currently.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Seqera container images are hosted on long-term infrastructure and because their URLs will be hardcoded into pipeline configuration, they should be highly reproducible. Even if new builds of the same software are created in the future using Wave (for example due to an update in the base infrastructure used by Wave) then the old images are still pinned by the pipeline and will continue to be used, much like the BioContainer URIs used currently.
```

> Because the container URIs will be stored in the module-level `meta.yml` file, any pipelines using the same shared nf-core/module will also be using the exact same container images.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As container URIs will be stored in the module-level `meta.yml` file, any pipelines using the same shared nf-core/module will also be using the exact same container images.
```

> We will further improve reproducibility at the conda level by adopting the use of conda lock-files. These pin the exact dependency stack used by the build, not just the top level primary tool being requested. This effectively removes the need for conda to solve the build and also ships md5 hashes for every package. This will greatly improve the reproducibility of the software environments for conda users, as well as improving reliability of Conda CI tests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We will further improve reproducibility at the conda level by adopting the use of conda lock-files. These pin the exact dependency stack used by the build, not just the top-level primary tool being requested. This effectively removes the need for conda to solve the build and also ships md5 hashes for every package. This will greatly improve the reproducibility of the software environments for conda users and the reliability of Conda CI tests.
```

This will allow us to embed a lot of audit data for quick reference:

-   Build time, architecture and platform (Docker / Singularity)
-   `Dockerfile` / Singularity recipe and Conda `environment.yml`
-   Full build logs
-   Conda lock files with full package URLs and md5sums for entire dependency resolution
-   For Docker images: Trivy security scan and software bill of materials (SBOM)

The conda lock files also allow enhanced reproducibility for Conda users and more stable CI tests - we'll come back to these in a future blog post / bytesize.

Finally, the image creation will happen automatically on GitHub Actions when an `environment.yml` file is edited. This means that the entire flow from conda file through to final containers will be entirely transparent, as the request to Wave itself and its response will be available in the GitHub Actions logs.

### What if we change our minds?

Using Seqera Containers does not mean that nf-core will be locked into using Seqera tooling. The suggested implementation has two components:

1. Automated on-demand generation of container images using Wave
2. Long term hosting images on Seqera Containers

> The tooling for image generation is [open-source](https://github.com/seqeralabs/wave). Seqera is hosting this API and build service for us for free, but there's nothing to stop us from hosting the same API ourselves in the future if we wish. As such, there is no lock-in on this API or any of the tooling which we will write around it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The tooling for image generation is [open-source](https://github.com/seqeralabs/wave). Seqera is hosting this API and build service for us for free, but there's nothing to stop us from hosting the same API ourselves in the future. As such, there is no lock-in on this API or any tooling we will write around it.
```

> Long term hosting is more fixed, but again Wave is designed to work with _any_ container registry. So if we want to change in the future we simply flip a configuration value and the generated images will be stored (“frozen”) at an alternative registry of our choosing. Old pipelines would need to have their configuration overwritten to use a different base registry, but this is a relatively simple step.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Long-term hosting is more fixed, but again Wave is designed to work with _any_ container registry. So if we want to change in the future we simply flip a configuration value and the generated images will be stored (“frozen”) at an alternative registry of our choosing. Old pipelines would need to have their configuration overwritten to use a different base registry, but this is a relatively simple step.
```

> In other words, this is exactly the same situation that we have currently with BioContainers and quay.io / Galaxy hosting. The nf-core community will remain free to pick and choose hosting solutions as needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In other words, this is the same situation that we have currently with BioContainers and quay.io / Galaxy hosting. The nf-core community will remain free to pick and choose hosting solutions as needed.
```

### Edge cases

Not all tools can use Biocontainers, and we're aware of some special-case packages that have only bespoke Docker images. These will continue to work as they do today.

### Can I still use my custom registry?

Yes - switching out the container registry base will still work in exactly the same way as it does today. You'll also be able to use Wave with these images in Seqera Containers if you wish - for example to mirror to your custom container registry, or augment with additional tools such as Seqera Fusion.

## What this means for you

### Users

> If you're using nf-core pipelines but not developing them, then nothing should really change! All nf-core modules and pipelines should start supporting linux/arm64 CPU architectures, such as AWS Graviton / Raspberry Pis(!). Conda users should benefit from faster environment resolution and more stable software thanks to use of the lock files. You may see a slight improvement in stability as we phase out our usage of quay.io, but this is minor and mostly only affects people running at high scale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using nf-core pipelines but not developing them, then nothing should really change! All nf-core modules and pipelines should start supporting linux/arm64 CPU architectures, such as AWS Graviton / Raspberry Pis(!). Conda users should benefit from faster environment resolution, with more reproducible and stable software thanks to use of the lock files. Finally, the failure rate of docker pulls will improve as we phase out our usage of quay.io.
```

> If you're using nf-core pipelines but not developing them, then nothing should really change! All nf-core modules and pipelines should start supporting linux/arm64 CPU architectures, such as AWS Graviton / Raspberry Pis(!). Conda users should benefit from faster environment resolution and more stable software thanks to use of the lock files. You may see a slight improvement in stability as we phase out our usage of quay.io, but this is minor and mostly only affects people running at high scale.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you're using nf-core pipelines but not developing them, then nothing should really change! All nf-core modules and pipelines should start supporting linux/arm64 CPU architectures, such as AWS Graviton / Raspberry Pis(!). Conda users should benefit from faster environment resolution and more stable software thanks to the use of the lock files. You may see a slight improvement in stability as we phase out our usage of quay.io, but this is minor and mostly only affects people running at a high scale.
```

### Developers

> If you're a maintainer of a pipeline that uses nf-core/modules, this means that your life is about to get easier! Never again will you need to try to figure out how to make a mulled image, or wonder when your Singularity image build will be available. New software releases can be used with modules within minutes of release and most updates should happen automatically - freeing up maintainers from having to deal with routine package updates and reviews.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you're a maintainer of a pipeline that uses nf-core/modules, this means that your life is about to get easier! Never again will you need to try to figure out how to make a mulled image, or wonder when your Singularity image build will be available. New software releases can be used with modules within minutes of release and most updates should happen automatically - freeing up maintainers from having to deal with routine package updates and reviews.
```

Reviewer: ![CleanShot 2024-09-12 at 23 52 26@2x](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f7c61e54-20c2-4afe-9286-a00d3735ce4e)

In part-two of this blog post we dive into the details of how we intend to build this tooling infrastructure in nf-core, so please check that out if you're interested.

## In conclusion

> We hope that the nf-core community is excited about these proposals, if you have any questions or concerns then please do let us know in the nf-core Slack ❤️

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We hope that the nf-core community is excited about these proposals, if you have any questions or concerns then please let us know in the nf-core Slack ❤️
```

import chillies from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-1/anne-nygard-3tPkwnNRRkI-unsplash.jpg';
import wave_logs from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-1/logs_screenshot.png';
import leaves from '@assets/images/blog/seqera-containers-part-1/providence-doucet-mE5MBZX5sko-unsplash.jpg';

import { Image } from 'astro:assets';

## Introduction

Dear nf-core community, the core team would like to inform you about some upcoming changes in how we would like to handle software containers... :package:

Software containers are a fundamental part of modern bioinformatics workflows.
Nextflow supports multiple container platforms, but the two most commonly used are Docker and Singularity.
When using containers, all software requirements for a specific Nextflow process are wrapped up into an image and referenced within the pipeline code.
The process tasks run in isolation in the host environment, and the end user doesn't need to worry about installing software dependencies for the pipeline.
The software builds are locked in time, making results highly reproducible over many years.

> To ensure maximum compatibility across different environments, nf-core modules are typically set up with a conda `environment.yml`, listing software package dependencies from [Bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io/).

Reviewer 5: I don't know whether it would be too much to add an example here:
```suggestion
To ensure maximum compatibility across different environments, nf-core modules are typically set up with a conda `environment.yml`, listing software package dependencies from [Bioconda](https://bioconda.github.io/), see an example [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/master/modules/nf-core/fastqc/environment.yml).
```

The [BioContainers project](https://biocontainers.pro/) conveniently builds Docker and Singularity images for all tools on Bioconda automatically, hosting the images publicly on [quay.io](quay.io) and the Galaxy FTP servers, respectively.

> This means that the nf-core module developer can find the matching [BioContainer](https://biocontainers.pro/) images for their Bioconda package, and then add the image URLs into the module's `main.nf` script.

Reviewer 5: Same here
```suggestion
This means that the nf-core module developer can find the matching [BioContainer](https://biocontainers.pro/) images for their Bioconda package, and then add the image URLs into the module's `main.nf` script, see [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/b6b54f3929b0ba4a7c02a49191308ce1d8351f0d/modules/nf-core/fastqc/main.nf#L6-L8).
```

The Bioconda and BioContainer projects have been invaluable to nf-core's success.
We're hugely grateful to all contributors for their work and to the Galaxy project for hosting.

## Change is on the breeze

<Image class="d-block ms-3 mb-3 float-end rounded w-25 shadow" src={butwhy} alt="Photo by Simone Secci on Unsplash." />

Bioconda and BioContainers have worked very well for nf-core.
However, we are now looking to migrate to a new system: Seqera Containers.

The motivation comes down to a few key reasons:

-   Difficulties with BioContainers
    -   [Mulled (multi-package) images](#mulled-multi-package-images)
    -   [Slow Singularity image availability](#time-to-singularity-image)
    -   [BioContainers API](#biocontainers-api)
    -   [Reliability of hosting](#reliability-of-hosting)
-   New features we'd like
    -   [Conda lock files](#exceptionally-reproducible)

>     -   Simplified developer workflow

Reviewer 5: It is not weird that this point does not have its own paragraph in the post like all the others?

Reviewer: Yeah, but the only one I could think of was "What this means to you > Developers" and that's right at the end, so not that useful. I don't think it's _that_ bad.

:::tip{title="What's changing"}
A detailed description of the proposed mechanism will come in part 2 of this blog post.
Here are the key points:

-   Developers will _only_ need to edit the conda `environment.yml` (no process `container`)
-   Container images will be built by Wave and stored in Seqera Containers
-   Build logs and source files will be shown on the nf-core website module pages
-   Conda lock-files will be used for Conda users and CI tests
-   Software releases will be automatically bumped in modules, using [Renovate](https://renovatebot.com/)
-   There should be almost no change in how end-users run nf-core pipelines
    :::

:::info{.fa-calendar-lines-pen title="Timeline" collapse}

This move has been in the works for over a year now.
It started with discussions between nf-core maintainers and Seqera developers about what the community needed.
Seqera's open source [Wave](https://seqera.io/wave/) container tool brings convenience, but long term storage of container images and stable container URIs were identified as hard requirements.
In response, Seqera developed _Seqera Containers_, a free community resource with hosting infrastructure funded by AWS.

> This service which was launched in spring 2024.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This service was launched in spring 2024.
```

> The adoption of Seqera Containers in nf-core was initially raised in the nf-core steering group, followed by discussion in the
> core team and then maintainers team (see the [nf-core governance structure](/governance)).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The adoption of Seqera Containers in nf-core was initially raised in the nf-core steering group, followed by discussion in the core team and then maintainers team (see the [nf-core governance structure](/governance)).
```

At each step, the discussion informed the planned infrastructure and setup for this change, as well as the development of Seqera Containers and Wave.

Several steps are still needed to complete this migration:

-   nf-core/modules automation for fetching images and pinning conda-lock files and `meta.yml` references
-   nf-core/tools tooling for pipeline config file generation, with pipeline template update
-   Bulk update of nf-core/modules to use Seqera Containers
-   Update of nf-core pipelines to use the new modules

If all goes to plan, we hope to have all modules updated by the end of 2024.
This work will be tracked in GitHub issues as usual,
starting with [nf-core/modules#5832](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/issues/5832).
This issue has already had a substantial amount of discussion, much of which has informed this blog post.

It's not too late to add your feedback! So if you have any questions or ideas, let us know on Github or Slack.

> Note that images from Seqera Containers can already be used in nf-core/modules, with the old syntax of using a `container` declaration.

Reviewer 5: Again suggesting an example
```suggestion
Note that images from Seqera Containers can already be used in nf-core/modules, with the old syntax of using a `container` declaration, see an example [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/b6b54f3929b0ba4a7c02a49191308ce1d8351f0d/modules/nf-core/bedtools/genomecov/main.nf#L6-L8).
```

:::

> ## Comparing BioContainers and Seqera Containers

Reviewer 6: A bit weird there is no description of what./how biocontainers works, when this title is 'comparing...', just what biocontainers _doesn't_ do

Reviewer: Yeah this is the victim of moving stuff around a bit. We do introduce BioContainers in the introduction already.

I'll try moving this down to here and leave just a very short bit in the intro.

Reviewer: Ok had a stab at doing this in 706fa025

This works well until you need to use more than one tool in a single process, particularly when the tools are from elsewhere in the conda ecosystem.
For example, many bioinformatics tools leverage [samtools](https://www.htslib.org/) to convert file formats or sort reads on the fly.
Others may pipe output to compression tools like [pigz](https://zlib.net/pigz/).
To resolve this, BioContainers has the concept of “mulled” images (as in [mulled wine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mulled_wine)).
Unfortunately, generating mulled containers is not trivial.

:::tip{title="How to make a mulled BioContainer" collapse}
Luke Pembleton, Nextflow Ambassador, has a great blog post summarising the dark art of
[Finding the right mulled biocontainer](https://lpembleton.rbind.io/posts/mulled-biocontainers/).
Galaxy also has [documentation on the topic](https://docs.galaxyproject.org/en/master/admin/container_resolvers.html).

In short, to request an image, you need to scroll to the bottom of a large
[CSV file full of hashes](https://github.com/BioContainers/multi-package-containers/blob/master/combinations/hash.tsv)
and add a line with your requested conda packages.

> Once edited, the images are built on CI.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Once edited, the images are built on CI.
The container then becomes available after a review and merge.
```

However, [Moriz E. Beber](https://github.com/Midnighter) from the nf-core community has created a webpage to
[generate the name of the mulled container](https://midnighter.github.io/mulled) which gently guides you through
the process of finding the name of your container and how to update a container if you want to bump the software versions.

Once the image is built and you know its address, the final step is to go to nf-core/modules,
create a pull-request with the updated containers, and bump the versions in the conda `environment.yml`.
:::

This system works and, despite its complexity, is now a familiar process to many nf-core developers.
However, it does present some problems.
It's a highly manual process to update software versions and the container declarations - just fetching the software for a module often ends up taking longer than writing the entire module.
There are also significant delays in waiting for the images to become available.
All in all, it can be a frustrating experience and we see this in the volume of Slack messages asking for help.
It seems likely that this puts some people off from contributing to nf-core.

> Migrating nf-core to use Seqera Containers will make provisioning multi-package containers trivial.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Migrating nf-core to use Seqera Containers will hopeully make provisioning multi-package containers easier.
```

I don't like terminology such as 'trivial', as it makes assumptions on the ability of people to do stuff - for some people it might _not_ be easy, and will make them feel bad/stupid.

Reviewer: Agree, but not the hopefully. It _will_ make it easier.

```suggestion
Migrating nf-core to use Seqera Containers will make provisioning multi-package containers easier.
```

Packages can be used minutes after their release on Bioconda and we will have automation in place to bump the Conda + Seqera Containers packages when a tool is updated.

### Time to Singularity image

BioContainers builds both Docker and Singularity images.
Docker images are pushed to quay.io and are available almost immediately,
whereas Singularity images are pushed to the Galaxy FTP server in a nightly build, taking up to 24 hours to become available.

This delay is frustrating for developers, as it breaks the flow of working on an update.
Once a new version of a tool is released, they have to wait for the Singularity image to become available before they can add it and test the module.
In practice, this often means that module updates get stuck in limbo for days until the developer has time to come back and check if the image is available.

Singularity images are generated on the fly with Seqera Containers.
Developers will be able update the nf-core module minutes after the Bioconda package is released.

### BioContainers API

> To simplify adding single-package BioContainer images to nf-core modules, we have developed the nf-core/tools package to query the BioContainer API for a given tool version and fetch the image URIs.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
To simplify adding single-package BioContainer images to nf-core modules, we have updated the nf-core/tools package to query the BioContainer API for a given tool version and fetch the image URIs.
```

or added functionality

Reviewer: Updated suggests a recent thing though, this has been around for ages and we'll now remove it. I think easiest to just simplify the sentence:

```suggestion
To simplify adding single-package BioContainer images to nf-core modules, the nf-core/tools package queries the BioContainer API for a given tool version and fetches the image URIs.
```

This process is repeated during linting of nf-core modules and pipelines, to ensure that there is not an accidental mismatch between Conda and Docker / Singularity software versions.

> Unfortunately, the BioContainer API has had a history of being slow and unreliable, with a lot of down time (204 error message anyone?).

Reviewer 6: ACtually it might be the quay.io side of things resulting in the 204...

Reviewer: Ok, that was from @edmundmiller's original text. Will remove if we're not sure (also now feels a little different tone to the rest anyway).

```suggestion
Unfortunately, the BioContainer API has had a history of being slow and unreliable, with a lot of down time.
```

/>

Wave build details page for the MultiQC v1.24.1 image: `community.wave.seqera.io/library/multiqc:1.24.1--789bc3917c8666da`

The final part is the hash - from this we can infer the Wave Build ID and retrieve the build details: [https://wave.seqera.io/view/builds/789bc3917c8666da_1](https://wave.seqera.io/view/builds/789bc3917c8666da_1)
:::

The new conda lock files also allow enhanced reproducibility for Conda users and more stable CI tests - we'll come back to these in a future blog post / bytesize.

Finally, the image creation will happen automatically on GitHub Actions when an `environment.yml` file is edited.
This means that the entire flow from conda file through to final containers will be entirely transparent, as the request to Wave itself and its response will be available in the GitHub Actions logs.

### No lock-in

Using Seqera Containers does not mean that nf-core will be locked into using Seqera tooling.
The suggested implementation has two components:

1.  Automated on-demand generation of container images using Wave
2.  Long term hosting images on Seqera Containers

The tooling for image generation is [open-source](https://github.com/seqeralabs/wave).

> Seqera is hosting this API and build service for us for free, but there's nothing to stop us from hosting the same API ourselves in the future.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Seqera is hosting this API and build service for the community for free, but there's nothing to stop us from hosting the same API ourselves in the future.
```

It's not just for us at nf-core, right?

> As such, there is no lock-in on this API or any tooling we will write around it.

Reviewer 6: Makes me wonder if we should have a roll-back plan if something goes wrong with the mass replacement system (unless this is going to be a gradual change a la nf-test?)

Reviewer: Nah, should be fine. The mass replacement is a one-off. I was thinking about this the other day. I think the best is the following:

* I generate a list of every conda env file to be requested
* I warn the Seqera team that it's coming, so they can bump up the back-end cluster size ahead of time.
* I use the Wave CLI to request every conda env file 4 times (docker, singularity, amd and arm)

I can do this whenever. Then when we come to migrate the modules, they'll each request a new image but it will already exist, so the API will just return the built cache immediately and cause no stress on the system. Going forward it'll be incremental so shouldn't be an issue.

Should be fun trying to request this many images in one go 😬 Curious what the final count is..

Long-term hosting is more fixed, but again Wave is designed to work with _any_ container registry.
So if we want to change in the future we simply flip a configuration value and the generated images will be stored (“frozen”) at an alternative registry of our choosing.
Old pipelines would have their configuration overwritten to use a different base registry.

This is the same situation that we have currently with BioContainers and quay.io / Galaxy hosting.
The nf-core community will remain free to pick and choose hosting solutions as needed.

### Special cases

Not all tools can use Biocontainers, and we're aware of some special-case packages that have only bespoke Docker images.
These will continue to work as they do today.

For people who need to mirror container images to their own custom registry, this will still be possible.

> Changing the registry base will still work in exactly the same way as it does today.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Changing the registry base will continue to work exactly the same way it does today.
```

## What this means for you

### Users

If you're using nf-core pipelines but not developing them, then nothing should really change! All nf-core modules and pipelines should start supporting linux/arm64 CPU architectures, such as AWS Graviton / Raspberry Pis(!).
Conda users should benefit from faster environment resolution, with more reproducible and stable software thanks to use of the lock files.
Finally, the failure rate of docker pulls will improve as we phase out our usage of quay.io.

### Developers

> If you're a maintainer of a pipeline that uses nf-core/modules, this means that your life is about to get easier! Never again will you need to try to figure out how to make a mulled image, or wonder when your Singularity image build will be available.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If you're a maintainer of a pipeline that uses nf-core/modules, this means that your life is about to get easier!
Never again will you need to try to figure out how to make a mulled image, or wonder when your Singularity image build will be available.
```
